# Lesson 4.1: Python
*In this lesson you will learn how to run Python programs directly from the terminal.*

In this last lesson of the course we will go into some more advanced ways in which you can use the terminal. Although not everyone will have need for these use cases, the advantage of using the terminal for those people that *do* need them is so big, that I want to dedicate a section to each of them anyway. This section: programming in Python.

## Python?
Python is a programming language known for its readability and the ease with which you can get something to work. It is currently one of the [most used programming languages](https://github.blog/2018-11-15-state-of-the-octoverse-top-programming-languages/). This has as advantage that there is an incredible amount of help to be found on the internet. A minor downside is that there are quite some programs out there that promise to be a nice programming environment for python, but in the end just make things more complicated than they should be. You might be one of the people who now think "Bob, what the fudge are you talking about? I have been using VS Code for years and i am totally happy with it". In that case i can be quite frank: this section is not for you. This section is for those that have limited programming experience and might not know which options there are for programming.

## Why use a terminal when programming
Programming is -- if you bring it back to its bare essentials -- writing code in a text file and letting an interpreter program read and execute the code you wrote. There are quite some programs that seemingly merge these two functionalities. These are programs (also called *integrated development environments*, or IDEs) like VS Code, Atom, Pyzo, Spyder, Netbeans, Eclipse etc. etc. etc. These programs might differ in looks, but in essence share the same functionalities: all highlight your code to improve readability, all can find bugs in your code (one beter than the other, though), all can feed your code to a compiler or interpreter. By all means, there is nothing wrong with these programs. They can simplify programming quite a bit.

I have however also encountered a lot of students who started programming in an IDE, who could write quite a descent program, but could not program without that IDE. They did not know how to execute a code without having a *run* button somewhere on the screen. When these students would then later on have to work with another programming language and possibly need another IDE, they would have to learn to "program" all over again. IDEs are nice, but understanding that they are just an interface and knowing how to work without that interface can actually immensely help in understanding programming.

As said: IDEs are in general a merge of a text editor and the functionality to send this code to an interpreter (or compiler, depending on the programming language). The text editor is as replacable as tomorrow's dinner: in principle you can write your code in the most basic text editor on your computer. On Ubuntu i would recommend `gedit` and `geany`. Both of these are GUI text editors. They store their text without any fancy Microsoft Word-like formatting headers (which is what you want for programming code), but also have highlighting features that make your code easier to read. If you are really a Terminal-fan, you can of course also use `nano`, `vi`, `vim` or whatever terminal-editor you prefer.

The interpreter on the other hand is a fixed program on your machine. It is a translator that changes your code into a language that your computer understands and can execute. You can access these interpreter through your terminal. This makes is possible to program without an IDE: first write your code in a program like notepad, then use the terminal to send your code to an interpreter. Not only do you have more control of *what* is happening, depending on the IDE you use this might actually result in faster program execution!

## How to run the Python interpreter
As said, in this section we will focus on Python. The Python language is a bit different from languages like C++, as it does not have to be compiled. It is *interpreted* at run time. This might seem like technical mumbo-jumbo to you, but this makes programming in python quite a lot easier than programming in a language that has to be compiled. On the other hand, interpreted languages are in general quite a bit slower than their compiled counterparts, but hey: you win some you loose some.

The fact that Python is interpreted has also as advantage that the Python program in your terminal can run in an interactive mode. Run the following command:

```
python3
```

This opens Python3's interactive interpreter (see the last paragraph for more information on the `3`). Here you can type any Python command and it will execute. You can also create variables and use them in future commands. See it as a program that you write line by line and it executed every time you finish a line. This is not very useful for large programs, but when you quickly want to check something (e.g. "does a list index start with a `0` or with a `1`?"), it can be immensely helpful.

To Exit the interactive interpreter, type `exit()`.

## Running your own code
In general you will however want to run code that you stored in a specific file (in general a `.py` file). You can do this by running the `python3` command, followed by the path to your code. This will directly send your code to the interpreter and directly return the result to your terminal (or to windows that you open in your script, e.g. plots). Again: this cuts out the middleman that the IDE is.

### `python` or `python3`?
Now you might be wondering: what is that `3` doing there in the `python3` command? The short explanation is that there are two versions of Python that are not compatible with each other: Python 2 and Python 3. Each of these has its own interpreter. Knowing that Python 2 will not be supported for very long anymore (see [https://pythonclock.org/](https://pythonclock.org/)), i would seriously recommend writing your code in Python 3. The differences are minimal, but Python 2 code will simply not run in Python 3.

---
## Exercises
1. Create an alias in your `.bashrc` file that redirects the `python` command to `python3`.
2. Open the interactive Python interpreter and execute `import math`. Then run `help(math)`. Have a look at everything that is available in the `math` package. You can exit this screen with `q`.
3. If you have your own Python code, try to execute it with the terminal.
4. Download the following python code: [files/approximate_pi.py](files/approximate_pi.py). It will try to approximate pi by sampling `n` datapoints from a 2 by 2 square and check how many of these points lie within a circle of radius 1. By default it samples 1000 points.
  - Execute the code in the terminal
  - The input argument `-n` sets how many points there will be sampled. Set to another number (e.g. by adding `-n 100000` to the command) and see what happens.
  - Providing only the `-h` option shows all options you can give the python code. Use the `-r` option and see if it behaves as expected.
