# Lesson 4.2: Connecting to other computers
*In this lesson you will learn how to connect with other computers and manage them as if you were using their terminal.*

With the dawn of computer networks, and especially with the dawn of the internet, computers don't exist in a vacuum anymore. They are connected with other machines, which allows for rather complicated and seemingly magic stuff. From teleconferencing to playing games with a person on the other side of the planet, computer networks make it possible. In this section we will not go that far into the theory of computer networks, but we will dip our toe in the pool that is connecting with other machines.

## Pinging
The most basic operation that you can perform on a network is `ping`ing another machine. This let's your computer call the name of a target machine ("Are you there, Deepthought?") and then waits until the target machine replies ("Yes, i am here!"). You can call machines by their URI (e.g. web address) or by their IP address. To ping google for example, you can run the following command:

```
ping google.com
```

When running, this command will send an answer request at a regular interval and will show the response time to the screen. If you are a gamer: it is this number that you want to be as low as possible, as it is the major component contributing to lag in your games. When you stop the command with `CTRL+C` a summary of the results will be printed, showing how much requests are not answered (the `package loss`).

## SSH
`ping` is a nice command to check if a machine is accessible from yours, but that is of course not all you can do. If the target machine runs a so-called *ssh-server* you can connect your terminal to it in such a way that it *looks* like you are directly working at the remote machine. Every command you type will then be executed by the remote machine and not yours. You can also browse the files on that machine.

For sake of completeness I should say that there are more technologies than *just* the ssh-server that make this possible. In the past telnet was very popular for example. The downside of this method was however that everything you did was sent as plain text over the network, that is: unencrypted. Are you typing a password? Someone with the right software could just read your password. That is of course not what you want, so `ssh` (or *secure shell*) was invented.

To connect to a remote machine, you run the following command

```
ssh username@remotemachine
```

where you replace `username` with your username on the remote machine and  `remotemachine` with the IP address or the URI of that machine. When you run this command for the first time, you will be asked if you trust the remote machine and if you want to store its fingerprint. This is a security measure that can be used to uniquely identify the remote machine. If you indeed trust it, accept the fingerprint. After that, you will be asked for your password on that machine. If you provide valid user credentials, you will be shown a terminal just like the one you have been using for the entire course, but now every command will be executed that the `remotemachine`.

### Simplifying `ssh` use with profiles
With *ssh profiles* you can make connecting to other machines a bit easier and quicker. These profiles store the `remotemachine` and `username` under a single identifier. Providing that identifier to `ssh` is then enough to make the connection.

Profiles are stored in the `~/.ssh/config` file. This file is normally empty or might even not exist. To make a profile, create this file and add the following text to it:

```
Host id
    HostName machine
    User username
```

Replace `id` with the identifier of your choosing, `machine` with the location of the remote machine (IP or URI) and `username` with your username on that machine. If you want you can provide multiple identifiers at the same time, separated by spaces, but one should do the trick already. The following is for example a totally valid profile:

```
Host home heart
    HostName 127.0.0.1
    User bstienen
```

Connecting to this machine can then be done through either of these commands

```
ssh home
ssh heart
```

Multiple hosts can be added in the configuration file: just add it below the previous one.

---
## Exercises
1. Try to ping google and see what the latency is.
2. Try to ping a website you know to be located on a server far away (e.g. an embassy) an check the latency.
3. If your machine has the `traceroute` command installed, run that on both google and the website you found on the previous exercise. This command shows you every crossroad your requests came across in its path over the internet.
4. If you have access to an ssh-server, create an ssh profile for it and try connecting to the server.
