# Lesson 4.4: Transferring files
*In this lesson you will learn how to safely transfer files between different machines.*

In the previous section you saw that it is possible to connect to a remote machine, execute commands on it and browse its files. This is done through an `ssh` connection, that communicates your commands to the temote machine and communicates any response that this machine gives to the terminal back to the terminal on your machine. That is everything `ssh` does, nothing more. It is for example not possible to use the `ssh` command to transfer files. In this section we will see two commands that *can* do this.

## Getting files from the internet (`wget`)
The simplest way of getting a file on your computer is by *downloading* it. In a graphical user interface you would go to a browser, open a website and click a specific link. The download would then appear in your Downloads folder. What happens under the hood of the browser is that the computer will request the contents of a file from the website, identified by a URL. The website then sends this content to your machine, and the browser will store whatever the website sends in your Downloads folder.

To do all this in your terminal, the only thing you need is the URL of the file you want to download. Imagine the URL of the file is `http://www.website.com/download.zip`. The command

```
wget http://www.website.com/download.zip
```

will then download this file to the current folder you are in.

## Transferring files between non-websites (`sftp`)
To get a bit technical: `wget` uses a very specific way of communication with other computers to get the files you requested. It uses `http` or `https`: both of which form the backbone of the internet. This works nicely, but it *does* require that the computer you want to download the file from is correctly configured as a *webserver*. This is not something that is automatically the case and you would be hard pressed to find a system administrator that opens up a server to the internet "just for the sake of it". You would just open up the machine to an extra type of attack from people with bad intent.

Instead the more appropriate *secure file transfer protocol* (sftp) is used. This is a connection that is specifically meant to transfer files and that can more easily be secured with for example a username and password. To use it, you run the `sftp` command as if you are connecting through `ssh`:

```
sftp username@remotemachine
sftp home
```

Note that just as `ssh` it has access to the `~/.ssh/config` file, making both of these valid `sftp` commands. When run (and after providing your password), you will be connected to the machine through an `sftp` prompt. This is quite a special prompt, as it controls two locations at the same type: the remote machine and your local machine. You can navigate in the remote machine through commands like `ls`, `cd`, `mkdir`, `pwd`, `rm`. The local machine is controlled with `lls`, `lcd`, `lmkdir` and `lpwd` (think away the `l-` and you see which command you will execute locally).

To transfer files between the remote and the local location, you use the `get` and `put` commands. The `get` command downloads a file from the remote location, the `put` command uploads a file to the remote location. For example:

```
sftp home
lcd Downloads
cd Documents
get download_this.pdf
```

There is only a limited number of commands available in the `sftp` prompt, in contrast to `ssh`, which has access to any command that is available on the remote machine. A list of all available commands is accessible through the `help` command, or by just typing `?`.

You can exit the `sftp` prompt by typing `bye` and hitting ENTER.

## Mounting external directories (`sshfs`)
Now this is fine and all. I mean: `sftp` works and what it does it does well. When i work with commands like these however i still have this nagging feeling that i am are getting some basic functionality by handing over some ease of use to the terminal gods, even though this functionality is not that basic at all. It just *feels* like it should basic. I just want to be able to use my default commands (my `cd`, `mkdir`, `nano` etc.) instead of having to learn all new commands.

Enter `sshfs`. The `sshfs` command allows you to *mount* an remote location. This means that you make the remote location accessible in your normal file system, which allows you to indeed use your normal commands to navigate and alter the files on that remote location. *Mounting* is however a more generic term than just connecting to a remote location. It is also used in the context of making *any* external location accessible in your file system, whether it is a USB stick, an external hard drive or your mobile phone.

To use `sshfs`, you need to create the folder in which you want to mount the external location first. You then point to this location and say: for *this* user on *this* machine, mount *that* location to *that* folder:

```
mkdir ~/mount_location
sshfs username@remotelocation:/home/username/ ~/mount_location
```

If you want to remove undo the mounting, run the following command:

```
fusermount -u ~/mount_location
```

---
## Exercises
1. Use `wget` to download a file from the internet.
2. Use `wget` to download a file from the internet and let it be stored at path `Downloads/download` (append the correct extension yourself).
3. Use `sftp` to download a file from a sftp-server if you have access to one.
4. Repeat the previous exercise, but now upload a file to the /tmp directory.
