# Lesson 3.1: Piping
*In this lesson you will learn how to link programs together to get the most out of them.*

## Design philosophy of terminal programs
You might have noticed that many of the commands you used so far are rather basic. List the content of a folder. Change folder. Change the owner of a file. Look for a file. No really ingenious commands so far, something like "look for all folders starting with 'r', list them and change the permissions for the default users to include read access". You will also be hard-pressed to find a command with such complexity. The reason for this is that it would go against the design philosophy of the terminal and its programs: small programs with a well-defined, small application range.

Imagine there would be a command to perform the operation we suggested. Let us call it `findlschmod`. First of all: it would need a lot of arguments, making it rather hard to use. Secondly: if this would be a valid command, where are then the `findlschown`, `lncdpwd` and `unzipcdcpcdzip` commands? The amount of commands quickly explodes if you were to allow for larger, more complicated programs. On the developer-side it would mean that each of these would need to be maintained, and if there is one rule to coding: if possible to write less code, write less code. Less code simply means less maintenance.

The terminal therefore only has simple commands builtin. That does however not mean that you can not chain them together to create quite complicated commands. The way it does this is through a progress called *piping*.

## Piping
In piping you send the output of one program to an other program. You can chain, or *pipe* commands together with the pipe `|` character:

```
command1 | command2
```

Let us look at an example. The `word count` (`wc`) command can count the number of lines in its input by providing it with the `-l` option. The `ls -l` command lists all files in the current directly, each getting its own line. By piping them we can count the number of files in the current director:

```
ls -l | wc -l
```

## Filters
Commands like `wc` are commonly called *filters*, as they take input and return their own output based on that input. There are many filters, so here we will list the most used:

**`sort`**: Sort the lines alphabetically

**`uniq`**: Remove double occurrences from the input

**`wc`**: Count the number of words in the input

**`head`**: Return the first 10 lines of the input

**`tail`**: Return the last 10 lines of the input

**`grep`**: Select the lines of the input following a certain pattern

There is no limit to the number of filters piped in a pipeline, so as a last example, let us perform a more complicated operation. Let us try to find (alphabetically) the first 10 files and folders in our home directory that contain the string "ssh".

```
find ~ | grep ssh | sort | head
```

---
## Exercises
1. The `history` command shows a list of recently used commands. Print the 7 most recently used commands.
2. The file `/etc/group` contains a list of all groups and their members. Use piping to count the number of groups.
3. Count the number of groups you are a part of. You can check your result by running the `id` command.
4. Given that `awk {print $2}` selects the second word of a string, get the location of the largest file in your home directory.
