# Lesson 3.2: Processes
*In this lesson you will learn how Linux manages running programs and how you can manage Linux in doing this.*

Everything your computer does is organised in what are called processes. Every program gets its own process: from the internet browser you open to the file explorer window, from scripts that run when your computer boots to the terminal you have opened to make all the exercises in this course. By rapidly shifting between these processes, the computer can make it look like it does multiple things it the same time, even though it only does one thing at a time.

## Viewing processes
There are multiple ways to view which processes are running on your machine, each having their own advantages and disadvantages. For this course we will look at -- what is in my view -- the most user-friendly one:

```
htop
```

This command opens an interactive process viewer and manager. It shows a list of all the processes on your machine that is scrollable with the arrow keys and it gives you the possibility to kill any of these processes as your heart desires (don't do so yet, we will get back to this in a couple of sentences). On the top it also shows you the number of CPU cores your machine has and to which degree they are in use, but also how much free RAM (memory) there is still available. To quit this application, hit `q` or `F10`.

## Stopping processes
Although this all seems very structured (because it is), computers are not fail-proof. Any of the processes you see can break at any time. If it is a background process, this might be rather inconsequential. Nothing really significant really depends on the program that displays the time in your menu bar. However, if it is exactly the program you are running at that moment (i.e. you are playing CS:GO and just when you want to make a headshot the game freezes), this becomes more annoying and may result in having lost unsaved data. Of course you could say: "see, you should save your data more often!", which is absolutely true. On the other hand: computers should ideally not fail on you.

When it happens however, it is nice to know that if a single program freezes, there is not necessarily a need to restart the entire machine (although this depends heavily on the process that decides to stop working). That is the advantage of having an independent process for every program: they don't influence each other directly, so if one process stops, the others can just continue their work as normal. Interesting fact: this is incidentally also the approach that Chrome (the browser) takes. Each tab in that browser gets its own process, so that if one website freezes, the other tabs will just continue working.

So how do you quit a process? Let's investigate this with a simple command: `tail -f`. Just as you saw in the exercises of the previous lesson, `tail` will show the last 10 lines of a specific file. By using the `-f` option (which stands for *follow*) you ask `tail` to continue looking at that file and showing any new lines that appear at the end of the file. So grab yourself a file (or create one) and run the following command on it:

```
tail -f filepath
```

where you replace `filepath` with the path to your file of course. You will indeed see the last 10 lines of the file, and the process keeps running. To *interrupt* a program like this, you can use `CTRL+C`. This requests the program to stop what it is doing and will stop the associated process. Although not all command line programs can be stopped with `CTRL+C`, it is a good first go-to solution.

Under the hood `CTRL+C` sends a signal to the program, called the `INT` (*interrupt*) signal. The program listens to signals like these and may act on them. `INT` is of course not the only signal. Execute the `tail` command from before again and open a second terminal window in which you open `htop`. Try to find the process associated with the `tail` command (hint: `F3`) and once you found it, hit `F9`. A list appears on the left-hand side of the screen, showing all the signals you can send to the program. `SIGINT` (number 2 in the list) is the interruption signal you sent the program earlier when using `CTRL+C`. For now I want to focus on two other signals:  `TERM` and `KILL` (or as they are called in `htop`: `SIGTERM` and `SIGKILL`).

The `TERM` (*terminate*) signal is like the interruption signal, but is more explicit: it indicates you not just want to interrupt the program, you want it to stop. Most programs don't make really a difference between `INT` and `TERM` though. The downside is however that, just as with `INT`, the program needs to be able to receive and interpret signals. If it is stuck in some loop or just flat-out refuses to listen anything you say to it for some unknown reason, signals will not really cut it. In that case the `KILL` signal (*kill*, as might be obvious) comes to the rescue. This signal is not sent to the program, but to the process manager of the operating system. This manager will then brute force the program to stop. Note that this also does not give the program an opportunity to clean up anything it has done. `KILL` should therefore only be used as a last resort.

## Killing without `htop`
I believe `htop` is a nice visual way of doing things, but its long list also makes things a bit cluttered. It also does not allow any of the nice piping techniques learned in the previous section. For a more power-user feel to all this process management, you can use the `ps aux` command. This command shows you a list of all processes on your machine, just like `htop`, but does not provide you with any interactivity. It just lists stuff, including the process ID in the second column.

When you know the process ID of the process you want to kill, you can use the `kill` command to send a signal to this program. This does not necessarily have to be the `KILL` signal though. By default, a command like

```
kill 16245
```

sends the `TERM` signal to the process. This gives the program time to wrap stuff up if necessary. To actually send the `KILL` signal, you have to include the `-KILL` option.

---
## Exercises
- Open `nano` in one terminal and `htop` in another. Terminate the `nano` process in `htop` and observe what happens.
- You cannot pipe the `kill` command in a pipeline. It is however possible to give the result of a pipeline to the kill command via:

```
kill $( ... )
```

where you replace the `...` with your pipeline. Given that `awk {print $1}` can be included to select the first word of the input to `awk` and `awk {print $2}` selects the second etc., write a command that automatically terminates all `tail` processes.
