# Lesson 3.3: Personalisation
*In this lesson you will learn how to personalise your terminal by adding your own functions and to manage your shell window.*

## The `.bashrc` file
When you open a terminal, a startup script is run. This script configures your environment and provides you with the opportunity to change the configuration of the terminal. This file is `.bashrc` and is located in your home directory. Note that the filename starts with a `.`, so it is a hidden file. See Lesson 1.2 (Exploring) if you want a refresher on hidden files. In this section we will look at what we can do with this file.

Before we start it is important to know that changes made to the file are not automatically applied to your *active* terminal session. The script only runs at startup of such a session. If you can make changes to the file, you therefore either have to close your terminal and open a new one, or explicitly run the `.bashrc` file again. You can do this with the following commmand:

```
source ~/.bashrc
```

### Creating an `alias`
So far you have seen a lot of commands already and have seen that options can add a lot of functionality. After using the terminal for a while, you will catch yourself using mostly the same commands and options over and over again. This is not a bad thing, but can become quite tedious if these commands are long or have a lot of options. In that case `alias`es can help you to streamline your productivity.

You can see an `alias` a shortcut for a command. Imagine for example that you want to count the number of files in your current folder. The command for this would be `ls -l | wc -l`. Not a very long command, but if you want to do this often, it becomes rather annoying to type this every time. Instead you can make an alias in the `.bashrc` file:

```
alias count="ls -l . | wc -l"
```

This alias will *replace* the `count` command with the `ls -l . | wc -l` command that we assigned to it. If you now source your `.bashrc` file, you can run the newly created `count` command in *any* folder to get the number of files and folders in that folder. You can make aliases for basically anything, but they have one mayor disadvantage: in general they cannot take any extra input arguments. A command like

```
count ~/Desktop
```

will not work, as it will be interpreted as

```
ls -l . | wc -l ~/Desktop
```

This makes just no sense. You would like to insert `~/Desktop` at the place of the dot, not at the end of the command.

### Creating full fledged functions
Functions make this possible are therefore more flexible that aliases. To write them effectively however you need to do some basic programming. Programming in bash is entirely possible and I recommend you look into this if "programming your terminal" sounds cool to you, but for now I deem it to go outside the scope of this course. We will therefore only look at how you can write simple functions.

A function starts with `function` followed by the name of the function. Between curly brackets you then add the commands you want to execute when that function is called. The `count` alias you wrote above can easily be adapted to be a function:

```
function count
{
  ls -l . | wc -l
}
```

Any arguments provided to this function are currently ignored: there is simply nowhere in this function that these are used. Input arguments can easily be accessed. `$1` gives access to the first argument, `$2` to the second, `$3` to the third et cetera et cetera.

```
function count
{
  ls -l $1 | wc -l
}
```

Source your `.bashrc` file and check if you are now able to check the number of files and folders in any folder on your system by providing a path to the `count` command.

### Colouring the terminal
If your terminal has been a black/purple-ish screen for this entire course, you might be wondering: can't this be just a *bit* more easy to read? I wouldn't bring up this question if there were no answer of course: through the `.bashrc` file it is possible to colour the prompt line and the output from the `ls` command, greatly improving the readability of the terminal. Below you find a lengthy piece of code that you can add to the `.bashrc` file to make this happen. You should only do this if there is not already code in the file that looks like this:

```
# set a fancy prompt (non-color, unless we know we "want" color)
case "$TERM" in
    xterm-color) color_prompt=yes;;
esac


# uncomment for a colored prompt, if the terminal has the capability; turned
# off by default to not distract the user: the focus in a terminal window
# should be on the output of commands, not on the prompt
force_color_prompt=yes

if [ -n "$force_color_prompt" ]; then
    if [ -x /usr/bin/tput ] && tput setaf 1 >&/dev/null; then
    # We have color support; assume it's compliant with Ecma-48
    # (ISO/IEC-6429). (Lack of such support is extremely rare, and such
    # a case would tend to support setf rather than setaf.)
    color_prompt=yes
    else
    color_prompt=
    fi
fi

if [ "$color_prompt" = yes ]; then
    PS1='${debian_chroot:+($debian_chroot)}\[\033[01;32m\]\u@\h\[\033[00m\]:\[\033[01;34m\]\w\[\033[00m\]\$ '
else
    PS1='${debian_chroot:+($debian_chroot)}\u@\h:\w\$ '
fi
unset color_prompt force_color_prompt


# enable color support of ls and also add handy aliases
if [ -x /usr/bin/dircolors ]; then
    test -r ~/.dircolors && eval "$(dircolors -b ~/.dircolors)" || eval "$(dircolors -b)"
    alias ls='ls --color=auto'
    alias dir='dir --color=auto'
    alias vdir='vdir --color=auto'

    alias grep='grep --color=auto'
    alias fgrep='fgrep --color=auto'
    alias egrep='egrep --color=auto'
fi
```

If there is already similar code, remove the hashtag at the start of the line `#force_color_prompt=yes`.

## Terminal profiles
When you are working on a machine with the Ubuntu graphical user interface (i.e. when you have icons on your screen), you can alter the appearance of your terminal to your liking. Before you now start saying "Well Bob, I use [fill in your favourite program] and I can do exactly the same!": yes, i totally believe you. There is however a plethora of programs with terminal functionality that probably indeed all have options to alter the appearance of the terminal. As I don't intend to write a manual for each of these programs, I will only focus on how to do this in Ubuntu.

Open a terminal and go to the menu at the top of the window. In `Edit > Profile Preferences` you can alter basically anything you see in your terminal. From the colours to the font. Do you want a pink terminal with purple letters? That is possible! Don't want the Ubuntu Mono font but rather like the Atavyros font? You can change it here! Note that after saving your preferences, you might need to select the profile in the menubar in the `Terminal > Change Profile` menu.

---
## Exercises
- Use the updated `count` function above and go to the Desktop with the `cd` command. Now run `count` with and without `~/Desktop` as argument. Is there a difference? If so, why?
- Create an alias that displays the list output of `ls`.
- There exists no function that creates a folder and automatically navigates into that folder. Create such a command and source your `.bashrc` file to test if it works.
- Some system administrators implemented a joke on their computers: as `ls` is often mistyped as `sl`, the `sl` command does something entirely, but harmlessly, different.
  - Check what the `sl` command does. If you want to play with it, check its `man` page.
  - If you don't like the joke, create an alias that solves this problem.
