# Lesson 2.1: Linking
*In this lesson you will learn how to make links to files and locations, so that navigation becomes a bit easier*

In the previous lesson you learned how commands work, what options are and how to use and navigate the Linux file system. These are basic skills that you absolutely need in order to use the terminal in any meaningful way. It is however not a complete skill set and if you actually want to integrate the terminal in your daily computer usage, you will probably quickly notice that with only the basic skills the terminal feels clunky. How, for example, can you search for a file? Is it not possible to create shortcuts to another location? Wouldn't it be nice to compress files into archives, so that you can store and communicate them more efficiently? This lesson addresses all these questions, as we will dive deeper into the file system. This section: shortcuts.

## Links (i.e. shortcuts)
A shortcut, or a *link* -- as it is called in Ubuntu --, is a way to create a way to navigate between folders and files other than using absolute or relative paths. There are two types of links in Linux: hard links and symbolic links.

### Hard links
Although hard and symbolic links do seemingly the same, there are technical differences. To explain these differences, I will use the following example. Imagine i have the file `~/Documents/course_material/outline.txt`, which i want to make accessible on my desktop as a folder with the name `course_outline.txt`. I can create a hard link with the following command.

```
ln ~/Documents/course_material/outline.txt ~/Desktop/course_outline.txt
```

My desktop now contains a file with the name `course_outline.txt`. If i were to change that file, `outline.txt` would change in exactly the same way. The reason for this is that they are not different files at all. There is only one file on your system, but there are two access points to that file: the `outline.txt` file in the documents folder and the `course_outline.txt` file on the desktop.

You can only create hard links to files, not to folders. If this were allowed, you could make a hard link to the parent folder, creating all kinds of loopy messiness. So no hard linking to folders.

### Symbolic links
You *can* however create symbolic links to folders (as well as files by the way). A symbolic link works like a shortcut in windows. It does not create a new access point, it just redirects to the folder or file the link is connected to. To create a symbolic link, you add the `-s` option to the `link` command (`ln`).

```
ln -s /home/bstienen/Documents/course_material/outline.txt ~/Desktop/course_outline.txt
```

The folders and files you link to don't have to be located on the same device: you can create links to the folders on your mobile phone for example. The system has of course no guarantee that your phone is connected to the system at all times, so symbolic links don't even have to redirect to an existing location. Yes, it will give an error message when you get redirected to a non-existing location, but this behaviour allows you for example to create links to locations you *anticipate* to exist.

---
## Exercises
1. Create on your desktop a symbolic link to the downloads folder.
2. Create on your desktop a hard link to a random file in your downloads folder.
3. List the contents of your desktop. Is there a difference in how hard and symbolic links turn up in the list?
4. Navigate into the downloads folder through the symbolic link you just created and check your current working directory. Is this what you expected to show?  
