# Lesson 2.2: Archiving and compressing
*In this lesson you will learn how to pack files and folders into archives like .zip*

## What is archiving
Archiving of files allows you to collect multiple files into a single file. This is useful if you have for example a photo album that you want to store for a longer time period (and don't need to access in the foreseeable future) or that you want to transfer between different devices. Instead of having to store of (heaven forbid) send multiple files, you just store or send one single file with all information in it. The original data can then be retrieved from the archive by *extracting* the archive.

An additional benefit of archiving is that is allows for a strong *compression*: reducing the size a file takes up on the system by changing the way it is encoded on the storage device. This comes at the cost of being unable to open the files as long as they are in their compressed state. Just as you can extract an archive, you can *uncompress* a compression at any time. No information gets lost in the process of archiving or compressing files.

## To `zip` or to `tar`, that is the question
The most well known archiving method is `zip`. It is the default method for archiving in Windows and it automatically also compresses the files it archives. The compression algorithm that `zip` uses is however subject to patents, so cannot simply be made publicly available.

Although you can use the `zip` command on Linux (as we will see later in this lesson), because of the patent restriction, it is not the most used archiving and compression solution. Instead `tar` is used for archiving. The archives, commonly used 'tarballs', can then be compressed with `gzip`, an algorithm that uses similar technology as `zip`, but in such a way that it is not subject to the patent that `zip` is. Having separate algorithms for archiving and compressing allows you to compress individual files or to create uncompressed archives: things that `zip` is not able to do.

### `zip`
Don't misunderstand me: I think `zip` can be incredibly useful, especially when you work together with someone working on Windows (or when you use Linux and Windows interchangeably yourself). To create a zip-archive, you simply run the `zip` command, followed by the name of the archive and then followed by the files and folders you want to compress.

```
zip new_archive.zip all_files/*
```

Unzipping is then as easy as running the `unzip` commando on the archive.

```
unzip new_archive.zip
```

### `tar`
Although more versatile than `zip`, using `tar` is a bit more difficult. For some reason the developers decided that the user *has* to provide configuration options. If you want to use it, you therefore either have to (1) look up the arguments every time or (2) remember which arguments to use. Personally i always use the same arguments:

- **`-c`**: Create an archive
- **`-z`**: Compress the archive using `gzip`
- **`-v`**: Show which file is being archived
- **`-f`**: The following option is the name of the archive
- **`-x`**: Extract an archive

When creating and compressing an archive, you can therefore use the options `-czvf`, which I personally always remember through the mnemonic "**C**ompress **z**ie **v**arious **f**iles" (hint: this mnemonic works best if you pretend to have a heavy German accent).

```
tar -czvf new_archive.tar.gz all_files/*
```

Note the addition of the `.gz` extension. This extension indicated that the file (in this case a tarball archive) is compressed. Uncompressing the archive then works identically, but now with the mnemonic "E**x**tract **z**ie **v**arious **f**iles"

```
tar -xzvf new_archive.tar.gz
```

---
## Exercises
1. Check in the `ls` manual how to print human-readable file sizes alongside the listed files.
2. Create a zip file containing some documents and compare the size of the zip archive with the sum of the sizes of the original files.
3. Do the same with a compressed tarball.
4. Now create a tarball, but *don't* compress it. Repeat the file size check.
