# Lesson 2.3: Searching
*In this lesson you will learn how to search for files on your file system.*

## The `find` command
In lesson 1.3 you saw that the Linux file system is rather large. And if you use your computer for a while, you will undoubtedly create a myriad of files. Finding a specific file can be quite a hassle if you do it by hand. Luckily you don't have to, as there is the incredible `find` command. I say it is incredible, as I truly believe it is so extremely configurable, it is entirely your fault if you can't find a file with it.

Basic usage is the following:

```
find ~ -name "name_of_the_file"
```

`~` indicates the starting point from which the search has to be started. The `name_of_the_file` can contain wildcards, directory names or even partial file or directy names. Run this command in the folder you want to search in.

### Adding tests
I promised that the `find` command would be configurable, so here it goes: you can add as many requirements on your search results as you want. Want to only find folders (and not files for example)? Only want to select symbolic links? Want to find a file that you used in the last 10 minutes? Want to find a file that is owned by `root`? All this, and more, is possible by adding *tests* to your command.

Let us start simple and require we only select files. We can do this by adding `-type f`, where `f` indicates a file (f.y.i. `d` would indicate a folder).

```
find ~ -name "name_of_the_file" -type f
```

At the same time we can also require that the file is less then 10 MB for instance. Adding `-10M` does the trick. `-` indicates the "less then" requirement (if we would have omitted it we would be searching for files with a size of *exactly* 10 MB).

```
find ~ -name "name_of_the_file" -type f -size -10M
```

There are many more tests that you can add, but for sake of clarity we will leave it here. The manual page for `find` is very extensive and contains basically all information you could wish for.

O, as a last note a message for those of you with some experience in programming. You can even group tests together with boolean operators, allowing you for example to look for "files with either a name starting with "b" and a size of 2 MB or more, OR a file less then 1 MB owned by `root`".

---
## Exercises
1. Search for all symbolic links in your home directory.
2. Search for all files in your home directory that were accessed in the last 2 hours.
3. Search for all files in your home directory with a size of at least 10 MB.
4. Read the section `operators` in the manual. Find all files in your home directory that are not writable by you.
