# Lesson 2.4: Permissions
*In this lesson you will learn how to make sure people can not read or edit your file if they are not allowed to.*

When playing with the `ls` command in lesson 1.5, you might have noticed that `ls -l` shows not only the files in a list, but also the name of two user accounts for each file. It also shows a weird combination of the characters `d`, `r`, `w`, `x` and `-` at the start of each line. Both the accounts and the seemingly scrambled characters are there because of the permission system of Linux. In this section we will have a look at what this system does and how you can use it for your own files.

## Permissions
Although you are logged in into your computer, with default user rights you don't have the right the wreak havoc in the entire system. Try for example to output the file `/etc/shadow` to the terminal. You will most likely see the following message appear:

```
cat: /etc/shadow: Permission denied
```

This message indicates that you indeed don't have the proper rights to view this file. Let us see what actually causes this. Using the `ls -l` command we can inspect who has which rights over this file. If we run the command `ls -l /etc/shadow` we see (apart from the date and time indication) the following output:

```
-rw-r----- 1 root shadow 222131 Sep  1 17:15 /etc/shadow
```

In this output we will focus on the `-rw-r-----`, `root` and `shadow` parts. To understand these parts, we first have to learn a bit about groups.

## Accounts and groups
Users on a Linux system work through their account with the system. That account is identified through a user ID (uid) and it determines which rights the account has. For every operation you perform on the system, the system asks itself "is the user with this uid allowed to perform this operation?". Although this sounds very safe, it is potentially problematic when there are multiple accounts on the system. Imagine for example a large company in which even upper management works with Linux systems. There is a folder in which management stores all kinds of secret information and they want to be the only ones who can read the files in that folder. This would mean that each of the files needs to have "this file can be read by X", for every manager X. If now one of the managers transfers to another company, someone has to go and alter *all* these files to revoke the access to these files for that person.

So instead Linux works with user groups. Multiple accounts can be put together in a single group and access to files and folders can be managed for that entire group at the same time. In this way the system administrator only has to remove the transfered manager from the management group, which would immediately remove his access to all the files.

To see for example which groups you yourself belong to in your Linux system, you can type

```
id
```

## How to read the `ls` output
Back to the `ls` command. We got as output
```
-rw-r----- 1 root shadow 222131 Sep  1 17:15 /etc/shadow
```

In this output `root` indicates the owner of the file. This is usually the creator of said file (I say "usually" as it is possible to transfer the ownership to another account). `shadow` says "For this file i want the group `shadow` to have specific permissions". Both the owner and the group have specific permissions for this file, all account that are not the owner and not part of the indicated group get the default permissions on that file.

But what are the permissions? These are specified by the `-rw-r-----` at the beginning of the output. This 10 character long string has to be read as 4 individual strings with lengths 1, 3, 3 and 3. The first character indicates what kind of object it is. A `-` indicates an ordinary file for example, whereas `d` indicates it is a directory and `l` indicates it is a symbolic link. The three groups of three characters define the permissions for the owner, the specified group and for everyone else (in that specific order).

These groups of 3 characters each follow the same formatting. The first character indicates if that user/group has read permissions. If so, it states an `r`, otherwise it is a `-`. The second character indicates write permissions `w` and the third character indicates the permission to execute the file `x`. In other words: the permission indication for the owner (`root`) is `rw-`, so the `root` user has permission to read and write the file, but not the execute it. Members of the `shadow` group (`r--`) only have permission to read the file and default users (`---`) can do nothing with the file. This is therefore the reason that we got our `Permission denied` error at the beginning of this section.

## Permissions on folders
Files are not the only objects that are subject to the permission system: folders are as well. Any file that is created in a folder automatically inherits the same permissions as the folder it is placed in.

## Changing permissions
If you are the owner of a file (or are the `root` user), you can change the permissions you, the group or default users have over your file (or folder). This is done using the `change file mode` (`chmod`) command, which follows the following format:

```
chmod <permissions> <file>
```

Here `<file>` has to be replaced by the file or folder you want to set the permissions of. The `<permissions>` argument is a bit more complicated. You need to replace it by 3 integers, one for the owner, the owner group and other users respectively. The integers are formed by summing the permissions (read = 4, write = 2, execute = 1).

Example: if you want to set the permissions of a file to only allow the owner full control over the file and allow the owner group to only read the file. All other users are not allowed to do anything with it. For the owner we get 4 + 2 + 1 = 7, because they are allowed to read, write and execute the file. The owner group is only allowed to read the file, so their integer becomes 4 + 0 + 0 = 4. The default permission indicator is trivially 0, so we would end up with the following command:

```
chmod 740 <file>
```

When changing the permissions of a folder, you can include the `-R` option. When then run, the permission change is also applied to every file and every folder in that folder.

## Changing the owner and owner group
To change the owner and group of a file (or folder), the `change owner` (`chown`) command can be used. If you only want to change the owner, you can use:

```
chown <username> <file>
```

To change the owner group as well:

```
chown <username>:<groupname> <file>
```

Only changing the group can be done by omitting the username entirely. Alternatively you can use the less general `chgrp` command (see manual for more information). If you are changing the ownership of a folder in this way, you can use option `-hR` to apply the changes to the ownership recursively to all files and folders in that folder.

---
## Exercises
1. What is the integer representation of the permissions of the /etc/shadow file?
2. Convert the following integer permissions to the 3x`rwx` notation: `755`, `134`, `642`.
3. Create a file and give yourself only read permissions over that file. Try to write to the file using `nano` (see lesson 1.4). When does it start to complain?
