# Lesson 2.5: Checking disk usage
*In this lesson you will learn how to check how much space your folders and file take up on the system.*

When you work on a maintained system, for example at a school/university or at work, you are most likely restricted in the amount of disk space you can use for your files and folders. It entirely depends on your organisation how much space you get, but as time passes the probability that you run out of space increases. This is not only true at maintained systems, but also on your own private computer: your hard drive(s) only has a limited size. As you accumulate files and programs over time, you might just run into disk space issues.

Solving or preventing this problem starts with knowing how much disk space you are currently using. In this section I would like to show two ways to inspect the disk space you are using.

## Going "full terminal"
The first one of these approaches is the most well-known one: the `du` command. It fully runs in the terminal, which can be extremely convenient (see for example section 3.1). To use it either navigate to the folder you want to know the size of and run `du`, or provide a location as an argument to the command:

```
du ~/Downloads
```

A list will be printed showing every subfolder, subsubfolder, subsubsubfolder etc. in that location, prepended by the size of that folder in kilobytes. To make the output easier to read, add the `-h` (for `human readable`). This converts the sizes on a per-folder basis to units of KB, MB, GB etc., whatever is most appropriate.

## A more graphical approach
I personally like `du`, it is clear, it works and it entirely works in the terminal. However, when interpreting numbers, a list of these numbers is in general not a very insightful presentation. If you are however willing to leave the terminal for only a single window, there is this awesome little program that allows you to inspect the sizes of folders in a tree-like or pie-chart-like visualisation.

```
baobab
```

---
## Exercises
1. Get the sizes of all folders at 1 level deep in your home directory.
2. Use the `du` command to get the total size of your home directory.
3. Check the size of your home directory with `baobab`. Which folder in your home directory is the largest?
